+++
title = "Am I actually that bad?"
# slug = "am-i-actually-that-bad"
date = 2023-11-01
draft = false

# [taxonomies]
# categories = ["Story"]
# tags = ["job", interview", "resume"]

[extra]
+++

> Article is translated with the assistance of ChatGPT.

**Disclaimer**: These are mostly unstructured thoughts on paper for self-reflection.

I've submitted 50 resumes and received 0 interview invitations? Why? Am I really so bad?

Starting from the beginning of this year, I began intermittently responding to some job postings. I tried to land internships with IT giants and also with smaller companies. Since I lack commercial experience, it's logical that I haven't found a job yet. Moreover, this doesn't concern me much as long as I have plans and personal goals. I didn't set any ultimatums for myself, like needing to find a job as quickly as possible and start earning money. What surprises me is that I haven't received any interview offers when I'm almost certain that after 2-3 interviews, I would recieve an offer because [in my mind I am always the best](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9OEIwxcRh0k&ab_channel=SyedNaeem). Let's try to break down why this happened.

At the beginning of 2023, I had almost zero goals and development knowledge in general. I had some knowledge of data structures (segment tree, dsu) and algorithms (dfs/bfs, dp), which was sufficient for participating in Codeforces and achieving prizes in national programming competitions. Back then, I thought I was ready for the real world of programming and couldn't understand why I didn't have a job, which seems quite amusing now. At the start of the year, I decided to make some changes. I installed Linux and felt the need to refresh my skills, so I began learning Rust instead of C++ (I had some knowledge of syntax and stl). Simultaneously, I was working on creating my resume and applying for positions. At that time, I understood that I shouldn't expect much because my biggest project was developed back in high school (winform Rubik's cube solver), and most of my projects were no more than 1k lines of code. My progress was rapid, and every week, I realized that just a week ago, I was noob. At some point, I accepted fact there are few job opportunities for inexperienced programmers in Rust, but I believed that if I became an expert in one area, I could more easily pick up the technologies required to secure a job. And that people will see my possibilities in one technology and give a chance to work with something new.

It's been almost a year, and I've applied to over 50 positions with no results. I might have overlooked this fact and moved on if it weren't for two situations. While reading a few blogs, I came across something called [recurse center](recurse.com). I immediately liked the idea of highly motivated programmers coming together to learn something new at their own pace or take a break from the routine work of developers. I saw that I could attend one of their batches at the beginning of the next year. I filled out the application, made it look good, explained why I was a great candidate. I hoped to meet many cool people and do a bunch of interesting things during those 6 weeks. But things didn't go as planned, and I was rejected even here. To get in, you also have to pass a mini-interview after submitting your resume. At that moment, I began to wonder, "What's wrong with me?" I understand I'm not an all-knowing professional, but 0/50, how? When developers I know are getting jobs with less knowledge and ambition (in my subjective opinion). The second issue is that in university, we were told we must complete a practice (like internship), which we have to find ourselves. So my plans of not having a job for a few more years and becoming gigachad contributor in the open-source community (like [@vaxry](https://github.com/hyprwm/Hyprland)) fell apart.

Typically, a job application consists of two parts: your resume and responses to specific questions. I suspect that I might be making significant mistakes in both of these stages, but since I'm not an HR, I can't determine if these are indeed mistakes. So, if you are knowledgeable in this area, please let me know ~ [mail](mailto:yurii.shymon@gmail.com).
* [My current resume](/Resume.pdf). A few nuances. Firstly, I think it would be better to choose a standard LaTeX [template](https://www.overleaf.com/latex/templates/omars-resume/yvmjzbpysxwg), which looks more concise than this google docs one. But this is just a minor point. My main issue is that I have a peculiar habit – I don't publish projects that I believe won't be interesting or useful to someone. As a result, my github consists of forks or other repositories not very related to code. This makes me feel like all my projects are very basic and not worth mentioning in my resume, hence it looks so empty all the time. The only project I'm proud of was written in 2018. I don't have much time for other significant projects because I'm studying and trying to get involved in other open-source projects concurrently. I prefer them over my own. My main selling point, which I tried to highlight, is my contributions to open-source. While this may seem basic to those reading this post, believe me, you're not like most. Many people looking for jobs don't really know how to make pull requests.
* _Answers to questions_. Here, I might make many more mistakes, but I'm not aware of them because I try to be myself. I try to be honest and intriguing at the same time, almost in all of my responses. For instance, I directly mention that I haven't worked with 'X' technology, but I've heard a lot of positive feedback and I'm willing to learn it. I also try to promote myself because I genuinely believe I'm a suitable candidate. It seems to me that this approach doesn't work in the field of hiring since often HRs don't have a deep understanding of technologies and may not understand me correctly. What should I respond? "Fake it till you make it" also seems wrong. Perhaps I should respond that I'm the ideal candidate and not try to show all my passion for the job and the desire to grow, even though everyone writes that they are looking for candidates like that.

### I'm bad, what's next???
Don't get me wrong - I'm not complaining that I'm like this and that, expecting everything to be handed to me on a silver platter. No, I'm ready to grow and work/grind further, but to do it more effectively, I try to better understand the principles of candidate selection so that I don't keep making the same mistakes. I know I've chosen a challenging and lengthy path when I decided to work primarily with Rust rather than JavaScript or Python, but I'm not giving up. I like my current ambitions; I'm doing what interests me. I'm going to focus on a large project (10k+ loc) that I won't be ashamed to show to others. After this, if I still haven't achieved what I'm complaining about here, I'll reconsider my life and existence.  
Perhaps in a month, this post will become outdated as I'll learn so much new stuff that I'll consider my present self as uninformed🧐.
