+++
title = "Job from the first try"
date = 2023-11-23
draft = false

# [taxonomies]
# categories = ["Story"]
# tags = ["job", interview"]

[extra]
+++

> Article is translated with the assistance of ChatGPT.

After writing the [previous post](../am-i-actually-that-bad/) where I complained and tried to understand why, after submitting 50 resumes, I received 0 interview invitations, I was motivated to undertake a somewhat challenging and interesting project. However, the next morning, I saw some clarification questions in my email regarding the Embedded C/C++ position. I responded to them as I had done before — simply highlighting how great I am but admitting that I wasn't very knowledgeable in networking. At that moment, I didn't really care whether anything would come out of it. I received an invitation for a call with the recruiter, where he was supposed to explain some details. I deliberately chose not to schedule it on the same day to have some time for preparation (thinking it wasn't just a recruiter conversation). After the conversation, I was invited to my first interview.

In general, it's not crucial what specific position it is, but for the sake of completeness, I'll share. Since I've been actively using Linux for the past year, low-level jobs appeal to me, as I generally enjoy working with this operating system. The job title is "Embedded C/C++," with a focus on networking programming. Prior to this, I had only worked with high-level protocols like HTTP and had some understanding of TCP.

## Preparation
I was scheduled for an interview a week after the recruiter conversation, so I had plenty of time to prepare, especially considering that I was basically a novice in networking programming and Linux details. I use the [Forest](https://www.forestapp.cc/) app on my phone (similar to Pomodoro), and over the week, I logged approximately 27 productive hours. I spent almost all of that time reading and learning. In the last few days, a bit less, as I had covered the entire base, so there wasn't much more to learn. During this week, I completed a [course](https://www.coursera.org/learn/computer-networking) on Coursera; wrote three small Bash [scripts](https://github.com/prajwalpd7/BashBlaze-7-Days-of-Bash-Scripting-Challenge/tree/main) to review syntax; read a mini-guide on [networking in C](https://beej.us/guide/bgnet/) and implemented several examples; explored cool Linux commands: strace, ss, tcpdump, traceroute, dig, etc; learned a bit about how Linux modules work; applied various [IPC methods](https://opensource.com/sites/default/files/gated-content/inter-process_communication_in_linux.pdf): sockets, files, pipes, signals; read another book, [Beej's guide on networking](https://beej.us/guide/bgnet0/). Overall, looking at myself a week ago, I was a complete novice and felt quite clueless, but now I feel very knowledgeable. It's great to see the progress, and even in case of a setback, I won't be too disheartened because I've gained so much in this week. I don't know how I would have faced the interview without these newfound skills; they now seem so fundamental, as if I couldn't do without them. If I had another week, I might have delved more into OpenWRT, Cisco Packet Tracer, or something more detailed in Linux. Now I feel ready, and I hope for the best.

## Expectation
The text up to this paragraph was written a day before my first interview, with the intention of capturing my thoughts and feelings. Well, and I don't have much else to do right now. It would be great to land my first job after the initial interview; it would validate my words from the previous post about being "production ready", but I simply didn't have the opportunity to prove it. That would be nice, but even if things don't work out, I'd at least like to be invited to a second round of interview, rather than being rejected after the first one, to get more practice. There could be challenges in general non-technical questions like "Why do you want to work for our company?" A small plus is that this will happen in my native language. While I'm proficient in English and can read, the last time I spoke with a native speaker was never. Overall, I assess my preparation at 8/10, with 10 being perfect for this specific position. I could have practiced a bit more with C and sockets, but theoretically, I think I know enough. The main thing is to fall asleep, because it is impossible to do this before important days. Also, I've had a hard time falling asleep this past week, as I've been sedentary and constantly imagined hypothetical situations before bed, such as someone telling me how smart and cool I am, making me an instant middle developer (I once wanted to start job hunting for junior position when technically I'd already be a mid-level in terms of knowledge).

## Outcomes of the first interview
The first interview went almost perfectly, and I received an invitation for the second round. The date is not set yet, but I have time to prepare. Since the first one was more theoretical, I think the next one will involve writing some code. Since I've been writing almost exclusively in Rust for the past year, I'll need to write a project in C within a few days - something around a thousand lines of code. Why I said the interview went almost perfectly is because I made a few really silly mistakes that I'm embarrassed about. There were quite a few theoretical questions, one of which was: "How to determine Big/Little Endian at runtime." I understood that I needed to take a two-byte number and somehow read the first byte. However, I didn't think to cast the pointer to type `char *`, so I gave up. That was the first mini-failure. I was asked to comment on a small Bash script, which I successfully did. At one point, I had to determine the complexity - I correctly said it was `O(n)`, but then for some reason, I changed my mind and said `O(1)` (awkward). The last task was a [logical puzzle][logical_task]:
> You are given two glass balls in a 100 story building. You have to find out by minimal drops which is the lowest floor at which they would break.

I found the answer in 19 steps, making the 10th step. The most optimal answer is 14, which I didn't think of, although the solution is not difficult.

So, in about 50 minutes of conversation, I made three mistakes, which are not critical but a bit sad because I know I could have avoided the first two if I had thought more before saying something. Overall, I enjoyed the experience, and I understand that I have the knowledge for this position since the interview wasn't difficult (because I know the material). I won't speculate on anything in advance; I just need to practice a bit with C code before the next stage.

## Preparation for the second interview
So, I had about 10 days to prepare for the next stage. I wouldn't say I accomplished a lot, but I wrote a [ping][ping_github] clone of almost 1000 lines. And it was quite useful; I had to use tcpdump to figure out why packets weren't reaching me, delve into raw sockets, learn how to work with ipv6, understand icmp packets, and so on. Overall, I can say I've made progress and am ready for the next stage. And let's not forget that I already have a streak of 30+ daily challenges on LeetCode, which I solved using C or C++. The next interview is in two hours. Over the past week, I realized that I'm about 50% eager to get the job, but also about 50% not very eager. Since July, I've been programming almost non-stop, grinding. And of course, it has its positive sides - I've become a much better version of myself. However, I've also compromised my health. So, I decided that before the New Year, it would be nice to take a break from programming for 2-4 weeks and relax because the grind starts again on January 2nd. I hope this mindset will only add confidence during the conversation because I won't be too nervous, and whatever happens, happens. Regardless, I can say that I've developed significantly over the year, starting from scratch. I know my worth, and in any case, I won't give up. Lightweight, baby.  
P.S. I've realized that the C language, while very interesting because you have to write everything yourself, work directly with memory, and interact with the OS, has a significant downside: it's challenging to live without namespaces, generics, RAII. Rust has a slight edge in this regard.

## Outcome
Yeah buddy🦅. The second stage was basically similar to the previous one, but there were more questions about C, although there were still many about networks. Overall, I thought I was answering well, but since the communication wasn't in my native language, it was a bit challenging to express my thoughts. They showed a snippet of code and asked how to improve it, and I think I handled it well. Then they asked a few questions about Rust, where I stumbled a bit. In general, I can say that I demonstrated a good level, but there were many nuances, so I can't objectively evaluate it. But I didn't care about the outcome.
After a few hours, I received an email with the content "Invitation to Join Our Team," where they informed me about the next meeting, where, as I understand, there will be a discussion about salary and other organizational details. Well, by then, I hope nothing will break because I've come this far. The only thing that slightly disappointed me was that they didn't ask me to share my screen to write something. I think it could have better demonstrated my level. I believe that after I calculated the time complexity of the Dijkstra algorithm in my head, they understood that I mean business.

## Goodbye Carefree Days
I am now leaving the carefree world of programming, where I could write anything, anytime. I could easily switch between technologies. I have a new mindset - to approach work responsibly, not just to do the job but to do it consciously, and to constantly improve independently of it. Although perhaps these are just my rose-colored glasses that will come off after the first day. Whatever the case, I found a job after the first interview, and I can be proud of that. Once again, I've proven to myself that no matter how much unlucky you may be, hard work can change that. Honestly, I could have kept these articles to myself, but perhaps someone will recognize themselves in these lines, maybe it will help someone. I'll go touch the grass outside. [Suwy](https://www.youtube.com/shorts/IB7WVweJUV4).

[logical_task]: https://www.quora.com/You-are-given-two-glass-balls-in-a-100-story-building-You-have-to-find-out-by-minimal-drops-which-is-the-lowest-floor-at-which-they-would-break-How-do-I-prove-it-mathematically
[ping_github]: https://github.com/woojiq/wotils/tree/main/ping
